\input texinfo
@setfilename xgngeo.texi
@settitle XGngeo Documentation

@copying
Copyleft 2003 Choplair-network.
@quotation
Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyleft
notice and this notice are preserved.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title XGngeo's Documentation
@subtitle XGngeo version 13 - 2003.11.15
@author The Choplair-network
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifplaintext
@example
__  __  ____  _   _   ____  ____   __
\ \/ / / ___|| \ | | / ___||  __| /  \
 \\// / / ___|  \| |/ / ___| |_  | /\ |
 //\\ \ \_\ /| |\  |\ \_\ /| |__ | \/ |
/_/\_\ \___/ |_| \_| \___/ |____| \__/
@end example
@* XGngeo - DOCUMENTATION @*
@insertcopying
@end ifplaintext

@contents

@chapter Introduction
@strong{XGngeo} is a frontend (@acronym{GUI}) for the Neo Geo emulator @strong{Gngeo}, both are free softwares released under the @emph{GNU GPL license}.
XGngeo is written in Python and uses the PyGTK library for its interface.@*
XGngeo is developed by the @strong{Choplair-network}, latest version is available on its website: @uref{http://choplair.tuxfamily.org/}.
@* @*
This documentation provides some information and a @emph{Newbies Guide} about get started with XGngeo. It will grow (I hope...) with each new version.

@chapter Get started
This is the complete and detailed procedure about how to get XGngeo fully functional!

@section Gngeo
XGngeo is a frontend for Gngeo, so you need this one!@*
Download the last Gngeo package from @uref{http://m.peponas.free.fr/gngeo/}.
Unpack it, configure, then start compilation... If the compilation fails, take a look at the "Help" chapter. Otherwise, you may now install it... 

@section Other requirements
In order to get XGngeo running, you need the following software installed on your computer:

@itemize @bullet
@item The @strong{Python} programming language (version 2.2 or more) - @uref{http://www.python.org/};
@item The @strong{PyGTK} library (version 1.99 or more) - @uref{http://www.daa.com.au/~james/software/pygtk/}.
@end itemize

@section Neo Geo bios
To be able to launch roms, Gngeo needs a Neo Geo bios.

@section Run XGngeo
It's time! Your are now ready to taste XGngeo. ^^@*
Download the last XGngeo package from the Choplair-network homepage: @uref{http://choplair.tuxfamily.org/}.@*
Unpack it then enter in the @file{xgngeo-@emph{XX}} directory (where @emph{XX} is XGngeo's version number).
XGngeo doesn't need any compilation phase. To launch it, simply type: @command{python xgngeo.py}.
If you get an error doing that, please see the "Help" chapter.

@section Configuration (@file{gngeorc})
Because it's the first time you'll use Gngeo, you will need to create the Gngeo configuration file (@file{~/.gngeo/gngeorc}).@*
With XGngeo, it's quite easy: you are invited to configure Gngeo, press @sc{Ok} then the configuration window will appear...
You must set paths:

@itemize @bullet
@item The @emph{Roms & Bios directory} is where both your Roms and the Neo Geo bios are.
@item The @file{romrc} file is a list of data required by Gngeo to play Roms. Its default location is @file{/usr/local/share/gngeo/romrc}.
@item The @file{libGL.so} file is required for OpenGL. Its location changes depending of the distribution; but it's usually @file{/usr/lib/libGL.so} or @file{/usr/local/lib/libGL.so}.
@end itemize

Once you have finished, press @sc{Save}. @*
Of course the configuration can be modified at any time using the same configuration window...

@chapter Features

@section Preview images (optional)
Since version 9, XGngeo is able to display preview images while selecting any of the games in the list.@*
It is fully compatible with the preview images used by other Gngeo's frontends such @emph{GGF}.@*
To enable the preview images, simply unpack the images pack archive (that you may get from Gngeo's homepage or somewhere in the Choplair-network...) into the XGngeo's directory.

@section Keys configuration
Since version 12, XGngeo got a Key Configurator. It works for the 2 players, but only with keyboard.
To modify a key, click on the corresponding button then push your new key. @*
@strong{Warning:} Because Gngeo (@emph{SDL}'s) and XGngeo (@emph{GTK}'s) keymaps are different, some special keys might be not recognized by XGngeo. If it occurs, please tell us (see the "Help" chapter)!

@section Internationalization
XGngeo, since version 10, is multilingual! At this time, translations are available in these languages:

@itemize @bullet
@item english (default)
@item french
@item polish
@item portuguese
@item spanish
@end itemize

If you want to make a translation of XGngeo in your language, follow these steps:

@enumerate
@item Go to the @file{data/lang/} directory.
@item Create a directory named as your language's code (returned with: @command{echo $LANG}). See @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_chapter/gettext_15.html#SEC221} for an exhaustive list.
@item Into the last one, create a new directory named @file{LC_MESSAGES}.
@item Go back to @file{data/lang/} then open the translation template @file{xgngeo.pot} with your favorite translation tool (KBabel, GTranslator, etc.).
@item Once you've finished translating. Save it as @file{@emph{XX}/LC_MESSAGES/xgngeo.po} (where @emph{XX} is your language's code).
@item Go to @file{@emph{XX}/LC_MESSAGES/} then do: @command{msgfmt xgngeo.po -o xgngeo.mo}. This will create a ".mo" file readable by the program.
@item Launch XGngeo which is now translated in your language!
@end enumerate

Every time you update your translation, don't forget to repeat step 6. When it's Ok, send your ".po" file to: @email{choplair@@fr.st}.

@chapter Help
@itemize @bullet

@item If you get any problems using XGngeo (the problem may come from Gngeo), the best way is to ask for help in the Gngeo's mailling list:

@itemize
@item @sc{Suscribe:} send a blank email to @email{gngeo-request@@ml.free.fr} with the subject @w{@strong{subscribe}}.
@item @sc{Posting:} send your messages to @email{gngeo@@ml.free.fr}.
@end itemize

Please give any details about the error that you can (version of Gngeo & XGngeo used, etc.).

@item Ortherwise, if you are sure that the problem is related to XGngeo, or you simply want to contact us, you should post a message on the Choplair-network's @acronym{BBS}: @uref{http://choplair.tuxfamily.org/bbs/}.
@end itemize

@chapter Credit
XGngeo's staff:

@itemize 
@item @sc{Programming:}

@itemize
@item Main coder: @strong{Choplair} @email{choplair@@fr.st}
@item Assisted by: @strong{Pachilor} @email{pachilor@@yahoo.co.jp}
@end itemize

@item @sc{Translation:}

@itemize
@item French: @strong{Choplair}
@item Polish: @strong{Matma} @email{matmaw@@poczta.onet.pl}
@item Portuguese: @strong{Paulo Eduardo Chiva} @email{paulo.chiva@@ig.com.br}
@item Spanish: @strong{Shilon} @email{slg@@bajoo.net}
@end itemize

@item  @sc{Documentation:}

@itemize
@item Draft: @strong{Pachilor}
@item Correction: @strong{Hori} @email{x_psyence@@hotmail.com}
@end itemize
@end itemize

Special thanks to the Gngeo author: @strong{Mathieu Peponas}. ^_~

@bye
